Because up to that time, we were not teaching
neuro. The student in anatomy knew the brain and
the gross parts of the brain, and that was about
all. And he had to know more than that as a basis for
his clinical material and for physiology,
because they were getting into neurophysiology
then. the central nervous system was becoming
more and more important as time went on, because we
were getting more drugs that acted on central
nervous system and what have you. So you have to be
aware of what's happening, and you have to know the
part that you're working on. Just as I told, I was in
a meeting of the American College of Veterinary
Pathologists in Chicago at the Kellogg Center,
oh, I guess about 15 years ago. And I criticize the
pathologists for not knowing their
neuroanatomy. You pick up an article and here's a
disease on the central nervous system. It affects
the cerebellum or it affects the brain stem. And
they tell you nothing about where it is, what motor
nucleus or sensory nucleus or what tract or
anything else that's involved. It's just in this
great big piece of brain. It's not pinned down
anywhere. So how can you draw any deductions on
that? You cannot. Except that it's an involvement
of the central nervous system. Or as a
veterinarian used to say, he's got some kind of
central nervous system disease. Some kind of.
Some kind of a nervous system disease. And that's
about all he knew about it. So I did get that. I did
get a good course in neuroanatomy. And when I came
back here in the early 50s, then we began making up
class sets of every animal species or domestic
animal. The cow and the horse, the sheep and the cat
and the dog and chickens and what have you, turkeys
and anything else, and monkeys. Baylor Medical
School was very nice to me. I don't know how many
human brains they let me have. And I worked up class
sets in human brains. And we went from the human to
the cow and the horse and so on. We took what we
learned from the human, because we had a human
textbook, the same that they were using in
Galveston Medical School. And we went from there
down into domestic animals for comparison. It
was, of course, in comparison. That sounds
tremendous. It was, even if I do say so. No, that
sounds like just a great idea. The students didn't
like it. Why not? Simply because the practicing
veterinarians who didn't know neuroanatomy.
What are you studying that stuff for? What are you
going to do about it if you find they've got some
kind of a nervous condition? What are you going to
do about it? So the students, some of them got the
idea that this is a waste of time studying all this
stuff. So I had to fight that idea too. But now it's
a- I think it would help them with understanding.
Comparative medicine, I think, would be very
important. Isn't there a new, in veterinary
medicine, let's turn to veterinary medicine,
just the discipline of veterinary medicine. It
appears to me that there's been more, after
talking to a number of your colleagues, that
there's been a more and more specialization.
Absolutely. From the time that you graduated
until today. And, of course, with more and more
PhDs too than ever before. And isn't comparative
medicine one of those fields? Absolutely.
Yes, sir. So I said to the students, you are going to
have medical doctors as clients. Yeah. And they
are going to ask you questions if this animal
happens to have a central nervous system
involvement. They're going to want to know, where
is the lesion? And what are you going to say? You
don't know? Some place in the brain. Some place in
the brain, or somewhere.
I think gradually they began to adapt to the idea of
neuroanatomy.
I had that feeling. Now, one of our graduates in
veterinary medicine is at Johns Hopkins now. Oh,
really? And she's in neuropathology. And she
wishes to high heaven that she had listened to me
more in the course in neuroanatomy.
So
I said, you can't tell. You can't tell what you're
going to be doing. Just like Ty Hardy. When Ty Hardy
was going through here, our only graduate in 1930,
he didn't care anything about small animals. All
he wanted was large animals. He didn't want to fool
with dogs and cats. Who's going to fool with those
things? Well, when he got out, what did he do? Sheep
and stuff and small animals?
Huh? So you never know. What do you think about this
10 trend toward specialization? What's your
opinion of that? Well, I really don't know. I
really don't know. I never went into that myself.
What's going to become of it? It all depends on the
population growth and the animal growth, the
population of animals and so on, the number of
veterinarians that we have, and the
specializations that they're doing. I really
don't know. To me, that's to come up. I don't know
how they're going to do anything. I know up to this
time why it's
been a rather broad specialization, either small
animals or large animals. or a milk and meat
inspection work or something like that. Some of
them, all animals, whether large or small. And
some of them only cats, and some of them only dogs.
They seem to be doing all right. Financially, I
guess they're doing all right. Everyone I've seen
says he's doing fine. Of course, that used to be the
way you'd go to a veterinary meeting, a
conference, and you'd see all these old boys that
graduated back there when you do. You did. How you
getting along? Oh, man, I'm really doing well. I
just don't have any overhead at all. All I got to
help him is a little black boy, and that's all the
overhead, you know. You know darn well he's not
doing that well. I think most of them have done
well, they've done well in real estate, and they
put their money wisely in other things.
But I really don't know about specializations.
Okay, one last question for tonight, and can we get
together again? Sure, anytime you want to. Okay,
and that concerns... the granting of graduate
degrees here. Our first Doctor of Veterinary
Medicine was granted in 1920, and then it was 15, 20
years later before the first Masters, and it
wasn't until 1955 that we granted our first PhD in
Veterinary Medicine. Why did it take so long? It
would be veterinary medicine. I wouldn't say
veterinarian medicine. Yeah, exactly.
Veterinary medicine. Why did it take so long? Who
did we have to give a degree? Who did we have to give
an advanced degree? We didn't have anybody who had
a PhD.
If you're going to give a PhD, shouldn't a PhD give
it?
Most
of them just had a degree in veterinary medicine,
and that's all they ever hoped to get. This was like
advanced degrees in medical college. I asked some
of the fellas down in Galveston, what about
advanced degrees for you boys who have EMDs? Who's
going to teach us? That's what the question is.
Who's going to teach us? the ultimate. Who's going
to teach us?
So to me, it's very much the same way now in
veterinary medicine. If you have a degree in
veterinary medicine, heaven help us just for the
catechism you go through, what do you want with
more?
But we have, at one time, and this hasn't been too
far back the degree in veterinary medicine was a
baccalaureate degree and we came last at
graduation after all the other graduates walked
across the stage v for veterinary came last and i
said mr heaton why is that so you're just a
baccalaureate degree you just have four years I
said, well, it's Doctor of Veterinary Medicine.
Well, it's just a baccalaureate degree. And we
went under that cloud for many, many years. So
degree in veterinary medicine, why, it was just
like an AB or BS.
Right. And that may have been in the back of my mind
when I went on and got my PhD, just for prestige on
the campus. What did I learn? I learned some
neuroanatomy. Do you think that was in the back of
your mind? Yeah, that was in the back of my mind.
As one of our friends here in chemistry, a PhD in
chemistry from Illinois, If you got a PhD in
education, you didn't have a degree. You had to
have an earned degree in one of those basic
sciences, like chemistry. Then you had, this is
his words, the degree.
Yeah. You have a degree in veterinary medicine and
I don't know, they sort of stuck in their crawl when
they called you doctor. Because that's just a
baccalaureate degree. Of course then we began to
say two years of pre-vet and so on and so on and now so
many of them have Four years, degrees and so on.
Before they even get to it. Before they even get
into veterinary medicine. Same way in human
medicine. Time was in human medicine, four years.
That was it. And well, from high school to medical
college. And the old family doctor we had in
Crockett, he said when he finished his sophomore
year in Tulane, he went out in the, sawmill town in
East Texas and practiced in the summers. And he
said he had to remove arms and legs that got mangled
up in the sawmills and so on. He knew more about the
anatomy than anybody else. And so he was the guy.
And as a sophomore from medical school, he was out
there doing surgery. But medicine has come so far,
so has veterinary medicine.
And of course, the research that's gone on in the
pharmacology and physiology and so on. The drugs,
the new drugs that are coming out every day. Now
it's interferon, maybe for cancer and so on. The
electron microscope, electronics, it's
miraculous. It really is, isn't it? Well, we're
going to talk about, next time we're going to talk
about the 1940s to the present. Well, good. OK.
That's all right. So thank you very much for this
interview. This ends the interview. This is Terry
Anderson.